Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. Science fiction is written by people with
diverse backgrounds. The range covers the sciences, the humanities, and even the
arts. Paul O. Williams, a 1982 Campbell Award finalist and author of four novels
so far in the Pell-Barr cycle, is an English professor at a small Midwestern
university. Williams allows that his approach to science fiction is different
from that of most writers. I come at science fiction from a different angle from
most people, out of much more of a literary background than most science fiction
writers, and particularly out of American lit. So I think my books tend to
bridge the two types a little more than most books do. The novels of the Pell
-Barr cycle, The Breaking of North Wall, The Ends of the Circle, The Dome in the
Forest, and The Fall of the Shell, describe America some 1,000 years from now in
the aftermath of a nuclear war. The descendants of the survivors have gathered
into tribes with various lifestyles. Some are wanderers, hunter-gatherers much
like the American Indians. Others have built cities where they remain year
-round. The city cultures are the most sophisticated societies, though they are
still quite primitive. At the time of the novels, Williams focuses on the Three
River region a few miles north-northwest of St. Louis. The cities of North Wall
and Pell-Barr again lie along the present-day Mississippi. Animosity among the
wandering tribes and the city dwellers is high. Skirmishes are frequent. We ask
Williams why he centered the saga around this area of the Midwest. I've lived
here two miles downriver from where I put Pell-Barr again, now for 18 years, and
I'm utterly fascinated with this area of the United States. I think I became
that way when I was way back in high school. I read Bernard DeVoto's book,
Course of Empire, which is mostly about the Louisiana Purchase and the move
westward, especially Lewis and Clark in their expedition. And the place has
always had a sense of drama to me around here. And also, this particular area
has a fantastic archaeological history. It's the one area in all of North
America that has the most, the densest Indian or prehistoric population. And
I've done a good deal of study of archaeology, too. It just seemed like a
natural place to put a rather settled civilization, or culture, rather, and have
these others impinge upon it. Individuals in the various tribes compose poems
and songs. We asked Williams if the lyrics which appear in the novels are his
own. Yes, they're all original poems. And some of them are, you know, really
just quatrains or hymn stanzas. There's nothing terribly remarkable. I tried to,
especially in the breaking of Northwall, use a variety of styles, inventing new
styles for each of the tribal groups, and that was kind of fun. Williams
considers one of the poems to be serious. The most serious poem, I think, in all
three volumes is one that is sung near the end of Dome in the Forest. And that's
actually a poem I've had around for years, and I think I kind of like it. It's
sung by a character named Tristal.
A friend of mine told me the other day that she had just been divorced, and I
guess it was a friendly divorce or something, and she copied the poem and sent
it to her ex-husband, which is kind of amusing to me. It's on page 211 of The
Dome in the Forest. It starts, Goodbye, My Favorite Stranger. I think that's the
most serious poem in the three books. More about Paula Williams on our next
show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This has been the
Science Fiction Radio Show,
coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon. The Pell Bar Cycle, a series of
interconnected novels written by Paul O. Williams, describes the beginnings of
the rebuilding of civilization in Midwestern America a thousand years after a
nuclear holocaust. In The Breaking of North Wall, the first novel of the series,
we learn that the inhabitable parts of America are people by various tribes
whose cultures are still quite primitive. The Pell Bar Tribe, for instance, is
the most advanced. It is a matriarchal society which lives in the city of Pell
Barigan. Here Williams details the tribe's origin. I envision the Pell Bar, the
Pell Bar, as a group that had been started by a woman named Amanda Pell, who had
been a, she's sort of a feminist. And she is a metallurgist, or was, for
Caterpillar Tractor up in Peoria. But she survived the holocaust by the fact
that she was spelunking down in the Ozarks. And it would be quite natural for
her to set up a feminist society. And I really, I sort of tried to create the
Pell Bar as a settled society with what you might call a nesting instinct. And a
natural combination of self-protectiveness and non-aggressiveness, although
they're certainly capable of great destructiveness. But potentially, a settled
place like that becomes a kind of mother of civilization. So that was what was
in my mind there. The more primitive tribes, such as the Shumai and the Sentani,
are wandering tribes. I created the Shumai and Sentani out of my memories of,
well, in part, out of my memories of the conflict of Caesar and the Celts in
Britain, the Shumai are very Celtic in their behavior because they're
enthusiastic, artistic, kind of reckless and unorganized, whereas the Sentani
are much more Roman. They organize into their star band and do everything in a
pattern-organized way. And I invented some backgrounds for these groups. The
Shumai, as offspring of the children of one farmer in southwestern Minnesota
named Aaron Schumacher, and the Sentani, the explorer scout troop led by Antonio
Sentani, who was a watchmaker in Memphis who happened to have a love of Roman
history. And they were on a field trip to a coal mine in Tennessee and so
escaped the Holocaust there and created their society along quite different
lines. Williams used historical precedents when he came up with the various
weapons the tribes use. The weapons in the breaking of North Wall really come
out of local archaeology because during most of post-glacial Indian history in
this area, the Indians were users of spears only fairly recently did they, well,
2,000 years ago, did they begin to develop bows and arrows. And that coincides
with their becoming a more settled culture, adapting to agriculture and that
kind of thing. We asked Williams at what point he generated the origins of the
tribes. The strange thing about it was I figured all of this stuff out after I
wrote the book, you know, said, aha, that's where it must have come from, rather
than consciously adopting these things for the book. It might sound strange, but
anyway, that's how it happened. More about Paulo Williams on our next show.
Thank you.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
END
выб caring associ in HA Dingen
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. In The Dome in the Forest, the third novel
in the pale bar cycle by Paul O. Williams, the primitive inhabitants of the
American Midwest approximately a thousand years from now discover a
technological society that has existed underground since the nuclear holocaust a
thousand years in the past. Technologically advanced, yes, but the Dome society
is bereft of feeling and intuition. In fact, Williams says the theme of this
novel is the clash between an emotionally dead, technologically advanced society
and the primitive tribes. One of the main things I was trying to do in the book
was to examine the difference between intuition and logic as means of human
understanding. And there are certain characters in the book, like Stale and Aro,
and like Ruth Ann, who comes from the Dome and almost immediately marries a
character named Blue. They're people who combine, to a certain degree, feeling
and thought or intuition and logic. And they very quietly succeed in advancing
their societies. But they're also extremes, as represented by Tor the Shumai as
a man of incredible intuition. And Eelon from the Dome as a person of nearly
pure logic. And those two really ought to get together. But they sort of
instinctively also distrust each other. And in the end, well, in the book, Pell
Baragin goes through a severe internal struggle as to whether to accept the Dome
people into their society. And in essence, the struggle to me is whether or not
the society is going to turn from being essentially a religious society to being
much more of a technological society. And they decide in favor of technology,
but it's not entirely a victory. Characters that are completely logical or
completely intuitive do not thrive in a mixed society. As the book continues, we
see the logical people, the merely logical people, continually making gross
mistakes. And the intuitional people, but particularly Tor, finding less and
less of a place in the central society of the Heart River, that is, Pell
Baragin, and in the end, Tor and his nephew are sort of coughed up. They leave.
They go essentially exploring, which is what intuition tends to do. One is
struck by the cover of the Dome in the Forest. The text actually describes it.
When we asked Williams if the artist had carefully read the book, then painted
the cover, he told us this was not so. The Dome in the Forest cover, though, did
not really come about as you anticipated. It's kind of an odd story. Because
when I was halfway through the book and I talked to my editor about what it was
going to be of life, he told me, we have this cover sitting around here and we
don't know what we're going to use it for. Would you mind if I send it to you to
see if you like it for your book? And so he did. And I liked the cover very
much. And so I actually wrote the cover into that scene near the end of the
book. Williams feels strongly that a culture can survive only if it nurtures
social growth as well as technological advancement. That's what the Pell Bar
cycle is all about. In a sense, I'm trying through the series to indicate, I
hope realistically, but to indicate anyway, that if social growth happens in
conjunction with technological growth, we're going to do a whole lot better than
if we simply give ourselves to technology.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This has been the Science Fiction Association.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Ane. And David Carson. Many works of science fiction deal with
xenobiology, where life which has evolved somewhere besides the Earth. In the
science fiction tradition, we have life ranging from lowly plant forms, which
yield pharmaceuticals or immortality drugs, to bug-eyed monsters with a taste
for voluptuous Earth women. But what do scientists think about the possibility
of life on other planets? We asked Robert Forward, a practicing scientist and
science fiction writer. The fact that the empty space between stars is full of
organic compounds, which just seem to be formed naturally by carbon and hydrogen
and oxygen and a little bit of starlight and lots of time, sort of seems to me
that this stuff that exists out between stars ought to exist just as well on the
surface of planets and so forth. And so I really firmly believe that there's
lots of life out there, because it just sort of seems to form naturally. And we
have physical evidence of it from the molecular spectra we get, not from
planets. We don't have any evidence that there's any organic material on
planets, except for one, ours. But we do have plenty of evidence there's lots of
quite complex molecular material in space, and so therefore, I mean, it would be
begging the question to say that it doesn't exist on any other planet but ours.
Okay, so the possibility for life in the universe looks good. Then why haven't
we been visited by intelligent beings which evolved elsewhere? If the universe
had a lot of intelligent species in it, most of them would be billions of years
older than we are, because we are on, around, a second generation star. Our star
is made up of trash left over from exploding supernovas from the first
generation stars. And if there were a lot of intelligent beings, they had
billions of years to sort of wander slowly at a snail's pace throughout the
galaxy, and they should have been here a long time ago. And there's no evidence
for it. And we aren't finding signals. And so there's a good deal of speculation
in the scientific literature right now that there is no other intelligent race
within this galaxy. We are the first. Does Ford believe we are alone in the
Milky Way galaxy? I don't really buy the argument, because I much prefer to
believe that an intelligent being, say, a thousand or years or a million years,
and especially a billion years older than we are, has better sense than to come
and say hello to us. And the reason for that is that what does a civilization
that's a million years older or a billion years older than we are, what can they
gain from us? The only thing they can gain from us is to watch us as we develop
to see if we develop in a different direction than they did and find something
new that they didn't find because they evolved from an intelligence viewpoint in
a different direction. If they contaminated us with one single evidence, one
single clue that there existed a billion-year race, billion-year-old race out
there, our present course of development would be immediately diverted to try
and track theirs. And we would miss whatever new that we might find. So there's
a very strong reason for an intelligent, ancient intelligent species to leave us
absolutely alone, because otherwise we're of no value to them.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
1lun涼